# 11\. Mutexes

Now the next topic of discussion is **THREAD SYNCHRONIZATION**  
The main parts of thread synchronization are

1.  Mutexes
2.  condition variables

Mutexes are like locks while condition variables are like signals.

# Mutexes

During time slice, operation on shared variables may not be atomic. Hence there may be chances of arriving of problems. To counter that we use mutexes which are like locks

There are two types of mutexes

1.  Static Mutexes
2.  Dynamic Mutexes

## 1\. static mutexes

```
#include <pthread.h>
pthread_mutex_t mtx = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER;
```

## Locking and unlocking a mutex

After initialization, a mutex is unlocked. to lock and unlock a mutex we use  
*pthread_mutex_lock()* and *pthread_mutex_unlock()*

```
#include <pthread.h>
int pthread_mutex_lock(pthread_mutex_t *mutex);
int pthread_mutex_unlock(pthread_mutex_t *mutex);
//Both return 0 on success, or a positive error number on error
```

you cant lock a mutex that is already locked by yourself, It is an error to unlock a mutex that is not currently locked, or to unlock a mutex that is locked by another thread.

If more than one other thread is waiting to acquire the mutex unlocked by a  
call to pthread_mutex_unlock(), it is indeterminate which thread will succeed in  
acquiring it.

```
#include <stdio.h>
#include <pthread.h>
#include <stdlib.h>

static int glob = 0;
static pthread_mutex_t mtx = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER;

void *threadfunc(void *arg)
{
    int loc;
    int loops = *(int *)arg;
    for (int i = 0; i < loops; i++)
    {

        pthread_mutex_lock(&mtx);
        loc = glob;
        loc++;
        glob = loc;
        pthread_mutex_unlock(&mtx);
    }
    return NULL;
}

int main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    pthread_t t1, t2;
    int loops = 1000000;
    pthread_create(&t1, NULL, threadfunc, &loops);
    pthread_create(&t2, NULL, threadfunc, &loops);

    pthread_join(t1, NULL);
    pthread_join(t2, NULL);
    printf("glob = %d\n", glob);
    return 0;
}
```

### *pthread_mutex_trylock()* and *pthread_mutex_timedlock()*

These are two extra variants of pthread_mutex_lock()

- ***pthread_mutex_trylock()*** : same like pthread_mutex_lock() but if the mutex is currently locked , it fails and returns error.
- ***pthread_mutex_timedlock()*** : Same like pthread_mutex_lock(), except that the caller can specify an additional argument, *abstime*, that places a limit on the time that the thread will sleep while waiting to acquire the mutex.

* * *

## 2\. Dynamically initiated mutexes

The static initializer value PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER can be used only for initializing a statically allocated mutex with default attributes. In all other cases, we must dynamically initialize the mutex using ***pthread_mutex_init()***.

```
#include <pthread.h>
int pthread_mutex_init(pthread_mutex_t *mutex, const pthread_mutexattr_t *attr);
//Returns 0 on success, or a positive error number on error
```

When an automatically or dynamically allocated mutex is no longer required, it should be destroyed using ***pthread_mutex_destroy()***. (It is not necessary to call pthread_mutex_destroy() on a mutex that was statically initialized using PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER.)

```
#include <pthread.h>
int pthread_mutex_destroy(pthread_mutex_t *mutex);
//Returns 0 on success, or a positive error number on error
```

## Mutex types

Depending upon the functionalities we require from the mutexes, we have three types of mutexes

1.  PTHREAD_MUTEX_NORMAL
2.  PTHREAD_MUTEX_ERRORCHECK
3.  PTHREAD_MUTEX_RECURSIVE

in the 1st type, no error checking is done.  
in the 2nd type error checking is done and hence we can detect any deadlocks or use it for debugging but this is a bit slower.  
A recursive mutex maintains the concept of a lock count. When a thread first acquires the mutex, the lock count is set to 1. Each subsequent lock operation by the same thread increments the lock count, and each unlock operation decrements the count. The mutex is released (i.e., made available for other threads to acquire) only when the lock count falls to 0. Unlocking an unlocked mutex fails, as does unlocking a mutex that is currently locked by another thread.

```c
#include <pthread.h>
pthread_mutex_t mtx;
pthread_mutexattr_t mtxAttr;

pthread_mutexattr_init(&mtxAttr);
pthread_mutexattr_settype(&mtxAttr, PTHREAD_MUTEX_ERRORCHECK);


pthread_mutex_init(mtx, &mtxAttr); //note that the real mutex is initiated here
pthread_mutexattr_destroy(&mtxAttr);


```