# Canceling a Thread

The pthread_cancel() function sends a cancellation request to the specified thread.

```
#include <pthread.h>
int pthread_cancel(pthread_t thread);
//Returns 0 on success, or a positive error number on error
```

**Thread cancel state:**  
The pthread_setcancelstate() function sets the calling thread’s cancelability state to the value given in state. This argument has one of the following values:  
**PTHREAD_CANCEL_DISABLE** The thread is not cancelable. If a cancellation request is received, it remains pending until cancelability is enabled.  
**PTHREAD_CANCEL_ENABLE** The thread is cancelable. This is the default cancelability state in newly created threads.  
The thread’s previous cancelability state is returned in the location pointed to by oldstate.  
Thread cancel type

```
#include <pthread.h>
int pthread_setcancelstate(int state, int *oldstate);
int pthread_setcanceltype(int type, int *oldtype);
//Both return 0 on success, or a positive error number on error


void pthread_testcancel(void); // sets a cancellation point
```

**Thread cancel type:**  
If a thread is cancelable (PTHREAD_CANCEL_ENABLE), then the treatment of a cancellation request is determined by the thread’s cancelability type, which is specified by  
the type argument in a call to *pthread_setcanceltype()*. This argument has one of the following values:  
**PTHREAD_CANCEL_ASYNCHRONOUS**: The thread may be canceled at any time (perhaps, but not necessarily, immediately).  
**PTHREAD_CANCEL_DEFERRED:** The cancellation remains pending until a cancellation point is reached. This is the default cancelability type in newly created threads. We say more about deferred cancelability in the following sections.

## cleanup handlers
```
#include <pthread.h>
void pthread_cleanup_push(void (*routine)(void*), void *arg);
void pthread_cleanup_pop(int execute);
```